What would you do
if you were tempted or pressured
to commit
some sort of wrongdoing?
There are many people
in the world
who would give in
to the temptation or the pressure,
especially if they felt that they
could benefit in some way
and they thought that no one
would find out about it.
But would doing that
really contribute to a person’s joy?
In the previous talk,
we saw a dramatization
of a brother named Ben.
At first, he chose to accept a promotion
at work that put him under great stress.
Let’s take another look
at him in that position
and see how he handles
things when his boss
pressures him to be dishonest.
Hey, Ben, it looks like you forgot
to sign off on a job order.
Actually,
these failed that quality inspection.
Remember?
Yeah, by like two tenths of a point.
Yeah, I already talked to Steve
about replacing the components,
and we’re going to get that order adjusted,
and I’ll have a new one for you
on your desk tomorrow afternoon.
Ben,
there’s no time for that.
This is a huge account.
If you don’t sign off on this,
you’d be hurting the whole company.
What?
Victor, I’m-I’m not sure
that I’m really comfortable
bypassing the inspection when . . .
Ben, I’m not asking you to tell some big lie.
This is a technicality.
Remember, a good quarter
means good bonuses for everyone
—including you.
I didn’t want to do it,
but the last thing that Lisa and I needed
was for me to lose my job.
I really didn’t have a choice.
If you lie, they can’t believe you.
And they might not . . .
I kept telling myself
that it was no big deal.
All lies are bad, even little ones.
One lie leads to another,
and they cause much harm.
It’s simple, right?
Jehovah’s people always tell the truth.
Did you hear what Ben said?
“I kept telling myself
that it was no big deal.”
But if that were really true,
then why was he so uncomfortable
about what he had done?
It is because wrongdoing
does not lead to true joy.
Ben’s conscience was not clean.
It was telling him
that Jehovah’s people always tell the truth.
And what is the conscience?
A young boy was asked
that question, and he said,
“When you’re good,
you don’t even know you have it,
but when you’re bad,
it hurts.”
Another child said that in her head
there was a green light
and a red light, and that when she was told
to do something that she knew was wrong,
the red light would flash.
Well, they both
had the right idea.
Our conscience is our inner sense
of right and wrong
that Jehovah instilled in us.
And the Bible says that it is
like a ‘law written in the human heart.’
Speaking of people in general,
look at what Romans 2:15 says,
as it explains
the function of the conscience.
That’s Romans 2:15:
“They are the very ones
who demonstrate the matter of the law
“to be written in their hearts,
“while their conscience
is bearing witness with them,
“and by their own thoughts
they are being accused
or even excused.”
Jehovah gave us a conscience
so that we can evaluate
any situation
that arises in life,
make a right choice,
and then judge ourselves afterward
on the choice we made.
If we allow ourselves
to do what we know is wrong,
our conscience
will surely strike us.
Then, if we repeatedly
ignore our conscience,
it will malfunction
and become insensitive
and it will not recognize
dangers that could damage
our relationship with Jehovah.
The first time a person does something
he knows he should not do,
his conscience may prick him
and he may feel guilty.
But if he does it
again and again,
his conscience
will gradually fail to respond,
and he may get involved
in even more serious wrongdoing.
Seemingly small compromises
often lead to larger ones,
and larger compromises
further distance people
from the happy God,
and that leads to feelings
of worthlessness and heartache.
Whereas a clean conscience
that results from obeying Jehovah
brings us self-respect,
personal dignity, and real joy.
Now, how can we
safeguard our conscience
so that it is always clean?
By studying Bible principles
and meditating on how to apply them,
so that when we are faced
with important decisions,
we will know how
to respond in a way
that will contribute
to our joy.
We have to sensitize
our conscience
by learning and loving Jehovah’s view
of what is right and what is wrong
and by being convinced
that living in harmony
with his standards
is the best way of life.
And that is how
the psalmist David felt.
If you’d like to turn
to Psalm 19:8,
Psalm 19:8, he wrote:
“The orders
from Jehovah are righteous,
“causing the heart to rejoice;
“the commandment of Jehovah is clean,
making the eyes shine.”
So maintaining a clean conscience
in all areas of our daily life
will bring us joy—in our use of alcohol,
in business dealings,
with entertainment choices,
and in our dealings
with the opposite sex.
And when we have a clean conscience,
as Jehovah’s people,
we are not ashamed
to give a witness to others.
As the apostle Paul wrote
at 2 Corinthians 1:12,
we can boast that “our conscience
bears witness
“that we have conducted ourselves
in the world . . . with holiness
and godly sincerity.”
At times, it takes
real courage to be honest
and to face whatever consequences
may come our way.
As you watch
the following dramatization,
see how Ben benefits
from being honest.
Hey, Javi.
Hey, Ben.
How are you doing?
Good.
How’s the job going?
Oh, the machine is running great!
Ben, I did have a question
on the specs for the Harrison job.
Can we take a quick look?
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Uh, let’s see here.
Need a hand?
No, I’m good.
I just . . .
Oh, no!
What happened, guys?
We got—we got to do something!
Um, disconnect . . .
OK.
Yeah, yeah, get it going.
Dead
—I’m pretty sure it’s dead.
I would just say that it stopped working.
Whatever you do,
don’t tell Victor what happened.
We just got this set up last month.
Why would it just stop working?
It could happen.
Oh, you can actually smell
the coffee.
I’ll talk to Victor.
Don’t throw yourself under the bus, Man!
We’ll help you get this cleaned up.
No one will have to know.
This is one of the most expensive
units in the shop.
If you take the blame,
you’re just making yourself look bad.
No.
It’s OK.
It was a mistake.
I’ll explain it.
We need to get this back online.
In the end, I think Victor
actually appreciated my honesty.
And he wasn’t the only one.
Mark had some questions,
and we had a great discussion.
This time, instead of his conscience
troubling him,
Ben had real peace of mind.
He also gained the trust
and respect of others.
How can you
have a clean conscience?
By being determined,
as Hebrews 13:18 says,
‘to conduct yourselves
honestly in all things,’
whether other humans are aware
of your good conduct or not.
Then you can sleep each night
with the satisfaction of knowing
that Jehovah
is pleased with you.
As they say, ‘There is no pillow
so soft as a clean conscience.’
It rewards us
with peace of mind and joy.
Besides a clean conscience,
what else brings true joy?
Listen as Brother William Malenfant,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
considers the next talk
of this symposium,
“What Contributes to Joy?
—Meaningful Work.”